advanced-topics/final-project/rubrics.md, before:

---
layout: default_dl
parent: AT - Final Project
title: Rubrics
nav_order: 20
---

# Overview
{: .no_toc }

{: .notice }
There are three main rubric categories that are detailed in the following sections for 135 points.

1. TOC
{:toc}

# Design Document (55)

## <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 1 (20 pts)

- 80% of your grade for Phase 1 will be determined by providing all sections completed on time.
- 20% will be provided once you have approval on your phase 1 to move to phase 2.

The approval may be graded after the due date and will not be late. However, you must get this signed off and complete well before phase 2 is due to be graded without deduction.

| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Project Description**    | - Provides a clear and concise overview of the project (2-4 paragraphs).<br>- Describes the project's functionality in sufficient detail for another developer to understand and potentially implement.<br>- Specifies the use of Java Swing for graphical development. | 5      |
| **MVP, Core, Stretch Features** | - Clearly defines the essential features that constitute the MVP.<br>- Features are realistic and achievable by the project's midpoint.<br>- Demonstrates understanding of MVP's role in project development.<br>- Shows progression and clear distinction between different feature levels (e.g. tabular like [this](https://nchs-cs.github.io/advanced-topics/final-project/examples/features.html))<br>- MVP features focus on initial validation and essential functionality.<br>- Core features encompass broader functionalities aimed at enhancing user experience and product value.     | 5         |
| **Purpose & Motivation**   | - Explains the rationale behind choosing the project.<br>- Articulates learning objectives and goals.<br>- Reflects personal or educational significance.                                                                              | 3  |
| **Learning Targets and Challenge Goals** | - Lists at least three Learning Targets of sufficient scope for the project. | 2  |
| **High Level Timeline** | - Lists High Level Milestones for the 10-11 weeks the project will fun for.<br>- 7 Development milestones are demonstrable pieces of functionality that can be checked off each Friday.<br>- Milestones are formatted correctly with no time estimates or individual assignments. | 5  |

##  <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 2 (15 pts)


| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Detailed Schedule (baseline)**    | - All weekly goals have a subset of at least 4 tasks that will be individually assigned and estimated (assignments not required)<br>- All tasks have reasonable initial estimates<br>- Initial estimates with multiplier fits within a reasonable range of a weeks work in class.<br>- Actual times can be recorded to calculate the teams velocity each week to adjust future work estimates. | 5      |
| **User Experience** | - Develop Wireframes and Mockups.<br>- At least 5 different screen layouts<br>- Screen Layouts show connections and annotations to explain how transitions or changes are effected by mouse or keyboard input. | 10         |

##  <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 3 (20 pts)

| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Detailed Design**    | - All weekly goals have a subset of at least 4 tasks that will be individually assigned and estimated (assignments not required)<br>- All tasks have reasonable initial estimates<br>- Initial estimates with multiplier fits within a reasonable range of a weeks work in class.<br>- Actual times can be recorded to calculate the teams velocity each week to adjust future work estimates. | 15      |
| **User Stories**    | - Each tasks on the schedule has at least 1 user story referenced writted per the definition provided. | 5   |
| **Testing Strategy** | - JUnit (or some testing infrastructure) is used to test methods.<br>- Some code is written that performs testing of important pieces of functionality beyond running the program normally. | 3 |
| **Algorithms** | - Clearly documents key algorithms (If your project has approval for no algorithms, your detailed design will be weighted with these points) | 2 |

# Project Completion (50)

The following rubrics break out the assessment by different areas. 

## <a name='Functionality50'></a>Functionality (40 Pts)

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Quality (Bugs)** | No major bugs or glitches. Program does not crash. All basic use cases work as advertised. Only minor bugs present. | Few major bugs. Program does not crash. Behavior is mostly correct. | Some major bugs. Program seldom crashes. | Major bugs prevalent. Important behavior malfunctions. |
| **Polish/User Design** | Appearance is clean and professional. No visual or audio bugs. Great attention to detail and creativity. | Appearance is mostly well-organized and neat. No usage issues. | Appearance is somewhat organized. Usage is somewhat difficult. | Appearance is poor. Usage is difficult. |
| **Quantity (Features)** | Completed all MVP features and then some. Code demonstrates many hours of focused work (6+ hours per week). | Completed all MVP features. Appropriate number of hours is evident (5 hrs/week). | Completed some MVP features. Shows a lack of effort and dedication (3-4 hrs/week). | A long way from appropriate effort and completion. |
| **Difficulty** | Difficult technology, algorithms, UI, and/or library integration. | Appropriate difficulty. | Lack of apparent or significant learning. | No demonstration of learning. |
| **Data Structures** | Appropriate in all cases. | Mostly good. | Some poor choices. | Poor choices abound. |
| **Class Design** | Strong use of all: abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism. | Use of inheritance and encapsulation is good. Reasonable set of classes. | Classes used, but not encapsulated well. Over or under-designed. | Few classes. Bad design. |

## <a name='Presentation'></a>Presentation (10 Pts)

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Formal Presentation** | Thorough presentation of project: functionality, learnings, and experience. Professional slides and/or presentation. | Demonstrates functionality and some insight into the development experience. No slides necessary. Reasonable quality of presentation. | Falls short of sharing functionality or experience. Presentation lacks quantity or quality. | Missing or woefully disorganized, lacking details. |

---

# Ongoing (30)

## <a name='Professionalism'></a>Professionalism (30 pts)

This section will be ongoing through the entire project lifecycle and count towards the final grade.

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Demo Days** | Clear achievements made during each demo. Shared learning along with functionality. Tasklist is completely up to date. | Some progress is demonstrated. Task List has some updates. | Progress is missing or too small. Worksheet is missing important information. | No progress is discernible. Worksheet is inadequate. |
| **Independence** | No instances of being off task. Asks for hints occasionally, independently researches, demonstrates problem-solving abilities. | 1 or 2 reminders needed to be on task. Needs help with difficult issues but demonstrates ability to debug and grow independently. | 3+ reminders to get back on task. Consistently unable to resolve (minor) issues without assistance. | Frequently off task. Cannot make progress without assistance. |

Commit message:

Tweak to rubric to update design doc at completion.

advanced-topics/final-project/rubrics.md, after:

---
layout: default_dl
parent: AT - Final Project
title: Rubrics
nav_order: 20
---

# Overview
{: .no_toc }

{: .notice }
There are three main rubric categories that are detailed in the following sections for 145 points (subject to change)

1. TOC
{:toc}

# Design Document (55)

## <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 1 (20 pts)

- 80% of your grade for Phase 1 will be determined by providing all sections completed on time.
- 20% will be provided once you have approval on your phase 1 to move to phase 2.

The approval may be graded after the due date and will not be late. However, you must get this signed off and complete well before phase 2 is due to be graded without deduction.

| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Project Description**    | - Provides a clear and concise overview of the project (2-4 paragraphs).<br>- Describes the project's functionality in sufficient detail for another developer to understand and potentially implement.<br>- Specifies the use of Java Swing for graphical development. | 5      |
| **MVP, Core, Stretch Features** | - Clearly defines the essential features that constitute the MVP.<br>- Features are realistic and achievable by the project's midpoint.<br>- Demonstrates understanding of MVP's role in project development.<br>- Shows progression and clear distinction between different feature levels (e.g. tabular like [this](https://nchs-cs.github.io/advanced-topics/final-project/examples/features.html))<br>- MVP features focus on initial validation and essential functionality.<br>- Core features encompass broader functionalities aimed at enhancing user experience and product value.     | 5         |
| **Purpose & Motivation**   | - Explains the rationale behind choosing the project.<br>- Articulates learning objectives and goals.<br>- Reflects personal or educational significance.                                                                              | 3  |
| **Learning Targets and Challenge Goals** | - Lists at least three Learning Targets of sufficient scope for the project. | 2  |
| **High Level Timeline** | - Lists High Level Milestones for the 10-11 weeks the project will fun for.<br>- 7 Development milestones are demonstrable pieces of functionality that can be checked off each Friday.<br>- Milestones are formatted correctly with no time estimates or individual assignments. | 5  |

##  <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 2 (15 pts)


| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Detailed Schedule (baseline)**    | - All weekly goals have a subset of at least 4 tasks that will be individually assigned and estimated (assignments not required)<br>- All tasks have reasonable initial estimates<br>- Initial estimates with multiplier fits within a reasonable range of a weeks work in class.<br>- Actual times can be recorded to calculate the teams velocity each week to adjust future work estimates. | 5      |
| **User Experience** | - Develop Wireframes and Mockups.<br>- At least 5 different screen layouts<br>- Screen Layouts show connections and annotations to explain how transitions or changes are effected by mouse or keyboard input. | 10         |

##  <a name='Rubric'></a>Phase 3 (20 pts)

| **Category**               | **Criteria**                                                                         | **Points** |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Detailed Design**    | - All weekly goals have a subset of at least 4 tasks that will be individually assigned and estimated (assignments not required)<br>- All tasks have reasonable initial estimates<br>- Initial estimates with multiplier fits within a reasonable range of a weeks work in class.<br>- Actual times can be recorded to calculate the teams velocity each week to adjust future work estimates. | 15      |
| **User Stories**    | - Each tasks on the schedule has at least 1 user story referenced writted per the definition provided. | 5   |
| **Testing Strategy** | - JUnit (or some testing infrastructure) is used to test methods.<br>- Some code is written that performs testing of important pieces of functionality beyond running the program normally. | 3 |
| **Algorithms** | - Clearly documents key algorithms (If your project has approval for no algorithms, your detailed design will be weighted with these points) | 2 |

# Project Completion (60)

The following rubrics break out the assessment by different areas. 

## <a name='Updates'></a>Updates (10 Pts)

There will be 10 points awarded for submitting your updated Design Document to match your finished project.

## <a name='Functionality50'></a>Functionality (40 Pts)

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Quality (Bugs)** | No major bugs or glitches. Program does not crash. All basic use cases work as advertised. Only minor bugs present. | Few major bugs. Program does not crash. Behavior is mostly correct. | Some major bugs. Program seldom crashes. | Major bugs prevalent. Important behavior malfunctions. |
| **Polish/User Design** | Appearance is clean and professional. No visual or audio bugs. Great attention to detail and creativity. | Appearance is mostly well-organized and neat. No usage issues. | Appearance is somewhat organized. Usage is somewhat difficult. | Appearance is poor. Usage is difficult. |
| **Quantity (Features)** | Completed all MVP features and then some. Code demonstrates many hours of focused work (6+ hours per week). | Completed all MVP features. Appropriate number of hours is evident (5 hrs/week). | Completed some MVP features. Shows a lack of effort and dedication (3-4 hrs/week). | A long way from appropriate effort and completion. |
| **Difficulty** | Difficult technology, algorithms, UI, and/or library integration. | Appropriate difficulty. | Lack of apparent or significant learning. | No demonstration of learning. |
| **Data Structures** | Appropriate in all cases. | Mostly good. | Some poor choices. | Poor choices abound. |
| **Class Design** | Strong use of all: abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism. | Use of inheritance and encapsulation is good. Reasonable set of classes. | Classes used, but not encapsulated well. Over or under-designed. | Few classes. Bad design. |

## <a name='Presentation'></a>Presentation (10 Pts)

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Formal Presentation** | Thorough presentation of project: functionality, learnings, and experience. Professional slides and/or presentation. | Demonstrates functionality and some insight into the development experience. No slides necessary. Reasonable quality of presentation. | Falls short of sharing functionality or experience. Presentation lacks quantity or quality. | Missing or woefully disorganized, lacking details. |

---

# Ongoing (30)

## <a name='Professionalism'></a>Professionalism (30 pts)

This section will be ongoing through the entire project lifecycle and count towards the final grade.

| **Criteria**               | **Exemplary (100%)** | **Satisfactory (80%)** | **Not Yet (60%)** | **Unassessable (0%)** |
|---------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| **Demo Days** | Clear achievements made during each demo. Shared learning along with functionality. Tasklist is completely up to date. | Some progress is demonstrated. Task List has some updates. | Progress is missing or too small. Worksheet is missing important information. | No progress is discernible. Worksheet is inadequate. |
| **Independence** | No instances of being off task. Asks for hints occasionally, independently researches, demonstrates problem-solving abilities. | 1 or 2 reminders needed to be on task. Needs help with difficult issues but demonstrates ability to debug and grow independently. | 3+ reminders to get back on task. Consistently unable to resolve (minor) issues without assistance. | Frequently off task. Cannot make progress without assistance. |
